Create 06-04-22_writeup.md (#151)
very-good-science/data-ethics-club: site/contents/write_ups/2022/06-04-22_writeup.md

The summary was written by Huw Day, who tried to synthesise everyone's contributions to this document and the discussion. "We" = "someone at Data Ethics Club". 
Nina Di Cara and Natalie Thurlby helped with the final edit.![White saviour vibes](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/85741581/163978137-43ba9592-1f61-4b1e-87d3-25415f6170f7.png)

```

```{image} images/White saviour vibes.png
:width: 200px
:align: center
:alt: A meme with a stressed man (representing tech companies) trying to choose between pressing one of two buttons: "Extracted data and exploit profits" and "Big white saviour vibes". Meme made by Euan Bennet.
```

## Discussion

### Introduction

This week at Data Ethics Club we read [The Algorithmic Colonization of Africa](https://reallifemag.com/the-algorithmic-colonization-of-africa/), an article written by Abeba Birhane. The article, set in the backdrop of the second annual Conference on Technology, Innovation, and Society (CyFyAfrica2019) which aimed "to bring forth the continent’s voices in the global discourse."

> The author discusses the uphill nature of this endeavour and how sometimes western influences coming in with their own tech solutions does more harm than good. We discussed ideas of utilitarianism, white saviourism and what we should be doing to learn more effectively from other parts of the world.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The author discusses the uphill nature of this endeavour and how western influences coming in with their own tech solutions do more harm than good. We discussed ideas of utilitarianism, white saviourism and what we (as westerners ourselves) should be doing to learn more effectively from other parts of the world.
```

### The author states that tech solutions are made on the basis of utilitarianism - “the greatest happiness for the greatest number of people,” - which means that solutions that center minorities are never sought. Do you agree, and what are the alternatives?

> That does happen, we do agree. You could imagine optimising proportionally by subgroups but you would then need lots of demographic data which is less likely and minority groups are less likely to trust why you would collect such information. [The immortal life of Henrietta Lacks by Rebecca Skloot](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Immortal-Life-Henrietta-Lacks/dp/0330533444) provides an interesting insight into why this lack of trust is quite reasonable and comes highly recommended by a few of our members. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That does happen, we do agree. You could imagine optimising proportionally by subgroups but you would then need lots of demographic data which is less likely and minority groups are less likely to trust why you would collect such information. [The immortal life of Henrietta Lacks by Rebecca Skloot](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Immortal-Life-Henrietta-Lacks/dp/0330533444) provides an interesting insight into why this lack of trust is reasonable and comes highly recommended by a few of our members. 
```

> Is this really utilitarianism or this is an abstraction? Do people really think about wanting to help people? Or do they just want to solve a particular problem? The exception is large firms with focus groups and decision making based on that. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, some of us who were better trained in philosophy asked if this really was utilitarianism. For example, women have been oppressed even though they make up half of the population.
```

### How does White Saviourism show up in the pursuit of tech solutions for social good?

One of our members did a dissertation which involved reading Google's AI ethics blog posts. One thing that came up (even before ideas of responsible AI) was a trend of "AI for Good" which in some ways is White Saviourism inate. The general approach was "if the country isn't in the west, let's go there and solve the problem with the AI." 

One of the problems is that there is a desire to shoehorn AI (or more generally, tech) into solutions. There are lots of problems where we need more money, people to help etc. and instead people in the tech sector are like "AI will fix it" (e.g. predictive policing, hiring and firing algorithms or [worker chat apps designed to suppress discussions of worker's rights](https://theintercept.com/2022/04/04/amazon-union-living-wage-restrooms-chat-app/)).

> This made some of us think of events like Red Nose Day where often people (usually in the West) don't want to solve problems, they just see it as a PR opportunity. It is the only time the poorest people in the world are represented. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This made some of us think of events like Red Nose Day where often people (usually in the West) don't want to solve problems, they just see it as a PR opportunity. It is the only time the poorest people in the world are represented, and how they are represented is not chosen by themselves but by the charities who want donations. 
```

One academic specific problem is when money is ring fenced for international help/charity in general. Don't really fully understand how companies would go about doing the same thing or why would they want to unless to distract data? Is it basically just a tax write off for them? If they were trying to be good people then would it not be hard to optimise by not focussing on using technology.

### What Western ideals influence the way we build technology in the Global North? What should we be doing to learn more effectively from other parts of the world?

We are all so busy trying to solve problems but we are not asking if they are the right problems to solve. We want money and we want to look philantropic. We also want to look cool solving problems (shoutout to [Elon Musk and his submarine](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-us-canada-50667553) comes to mind). 

> Under what circumstances should we do businesses in Africa/abroad in general? Providing goods and services? There's models of partnerships with governments/community groups that are the purely extractive neo-colonial models which are too prevelant. There has to be a fine line there because if there's a corrupt government/group you're working with, how do we know the money we're putting in is going to the right place? An example a little closer to home is UK PPE contracts where there was [‘apparent systemic bias’ in award of lucrative PPE deals favouring firms connected to Tories](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/apr/22/fifth-of-uk-covid-contracts-raised-red-flags-for-possible-corruption).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under what circumstances should we do businesses in Africa/abroad in general? Providing goods and services? There's models of partnerships with governments/community groups that are the purely extractive neo-colonial models which are too prevelant. There has to be a fine line there because if there's a corrupt government/group you're working with, how do we know the money we're putting in is going to the right place? An example a little closer to home is UK PPE contracts where there was [‘apparent systemic bias’ in award of lucrative PPE deals favouring firms connected to Tories](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/apr/22/fifth-of-uk-covid-contracts-raised-red-flags-for-possible-corruption), so this issue is one that is prevalent everywhere.
```

### What we would have liked to see more of in this piece? 

> Who gets to decide where is too corrupt? There were not enough case studies in this article. We would like to have known more about what kind of models work and what models don't? This article felt like it was taken every common strand of data ethics issues and then was like "oh now it's in Africa". Whilst it was a good introduction if you don't know about data ethics, it was also quite broad and not very focussed. We were missing the information we needed to form a full opinion on all this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Who gets to decide where is too corrupt? There were not enough case studies in this article. We would like to have known more about what kind of models work and what models don't? This article felt like it was taken every common strand of data ethics issues applied in the African context. Whilst it was a good introduction if you don't know about data ethics, it was also quite broad and not very focussed. We were missing the information we needed to form a full opinion on all this.
```
